time activation of the communities internal and external
links can behave differently. In general, it is thought
that temporal and topological correlations contribute to
slow down the dynamical processes on networks especially
when the dynamics on empirical networks is compared
with that on randomized null models [10, 24, 25].
Here we approach the problem from a different perspective.
The topologically induced and temporal correlations
in the interevent times of the network link
activation are added artificially, with the possibility of
tuning their strength. As paradigmartic examples we
then consider two dynamical processes of diverse nature:
Susceptible-Infected SI spreading and the voter model as
paradigmatic prototypes of epidemics and opinion models.
Our results show that the effect of both types of correlations
alone on the dynamics are opposite (memory effects
accelerate the dynamics, while correlations induced
by community structure slows it down). However, when
both types are combined the final dynamics crucially depends
on how the combination is built with diverging
outcomes if the correlations are strengthened.
To illustrate the different types of correlations, we
use data extracted from Twitter. Our database contains
73 405 100 directed tweets (replies and mentions)
obtained following the activity of 2 590 459 unique users.
In this case, the nodes of the network are the users and a
directed link is established every time that an user sends
a message. In total, there are 5 812 089 links among the
considered users. Figure 1a shows the activity pattern of
a particular link. The x-axis represents time and a blue
tick is displayed every time a message is sent. As can be
seen, the events are concentrated in avalanches with periods
of high activity and short interevent times followed
by long periods of inactivity. The interevent time distribution
is displayed in Figure 1b. The peaks correspond to
circadian rhythms of multiples of 24 hours (see the top inset).
The network can be divided in groups using a community
detection algorithm. In this case, we employed
Infomap [31]. The activation interevent times of the links