Nuclear magnetic resonance gyros (NMRGs) based on spin-exchange optical pumping
of noble gases have been developed over several decades of largely industrial research,
first at Litton Industries and more recently at Northrop Grumman Corporation (NGC).
The basic physics of the production and detection of nuclear magnetic resonance using
hyperpolarized noble gases has been extensively studied, and off-shoots of NMRGs in
physics laboratories have achieved some of the highest sensitivity frequency measurements
to date. In this paper we present a mostly self-contained discussion of the physics
and operation of NMRGs of the Litton/NGC type.
Although spin-exchange optical pumping (SEOP) of He-3 was first demonstrated in
1960 by Bouchiat, Carver, and Varnum (Bouchiat et al., 1960), little follow-up occurred
in academic laboratories in the 1960s and 1970s. During that period, Litton began investigating the use of SEOP for gyroscopic applications (Grover et al., 1979). This work
included the first demonstrations of SEOP of Ne, Kr, and Xe, the recognition of the remarkably high polarizations attainable, and the further enhancement of hyperpolarized
NMR signals using in-situ magnetometry (Grover, 1978). With the advent of ring-laser
and fiber-optic gyros, this work was discontinued at Litton in the mid 1980s. Meanwhile,
W. Happer and his group at Princeton published an extensive set of investigations into
the fundamental physics of hyperpolarized noble gases (Happer et al., 1984; Zeng et al.,
1985; Walker and Happer, 1997). This work led to the development of magnetic resonance
imaging using hyperpolarized He and Xe (Albert et al., 1994; Middleton et al.,
1995), high-density spin-polarized targets for nuclear and high-energy physics (Singh
et al., 2015), neutron polarizers and analysers (Chen et al., 2014), extensive use of hyperpolarized
Xe in chemical physics and NMR spectroscopy(Ledbetter et al., 2012), and
further development of hyperpolarized gases for ultrasensitive spectroscopy in devices
such as noble-gas masers (Glenday et al., 2008; Rosenberry and Chupp, 2001), gyros
(Kornack et al., 2005; Fang et al., 2013) and co-magnetometers for studies of fundamental
symmetries (Smiciklas et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2010).
It is remarkable that with this tremendous range of applications of hyperpolarized
noble gases, the original stimulating ideas from the 1970s about their use for NMRGs
was never published beyond a single overview paper by Kanegsberg (1978), a review
by Karwacki (1980), patents, conference proceedings, and project reports to funding
agencies. This work was reviewed from a current perspective by Donley (2010). Interest
in NMR gyros revived in the early 2000s at NGC when it was realized that NMRGs
have the potential to outperform other types of gyros for small, low-power applications.
This development is continuing (Larsen and Bulatowicz, 2012; Meyer and Larsen, 2014),
and an overview of the basic concepts of NMRGs was recently published by Donley
and Kitching (2013). The authors feel that it is timely to present a more detailed
2 treatment of the physics of spin-exchange-pumped NMRGs, in particular as implemented
in the Litton/NGC design. A parallel development has begun in China (Liu et al.,
2015), and a related approach with applications to Xe edm searches is being pursued
in Japan (Yoshimi et al., 2008). Although the individual components of NMRGs have
been studied in other contexts, the realization of hyperpolarized gas techniques into a
small physical package with remarkable capabilities vis-a-vis sensitivity, accuracy, while
simultaneously maintaining an impressive bandwidth are of considerable current research
interest. Furthermore, new approaches are now being investigated (at Wisconsin and
elsewhere), and an appreciation for the successes and challenges of the NGC NMRG are
essential for proper evaluation of those new approaches.