In the transformative field of ultrafast light–matter
interaction, characterization of strong-field laser pulses is
crucial in order to draw quantitative conclusions from
measurement results. Based on the detection of
photoelectrons, the attosecond streaking technique
provides insight into the system’s underlying quantum
dynamics on the natural electronic time scale, combined
with a powerful characterization of the used strong-field
laser pulses [1-3]. Being capable of resolving bound-state
quantum dynamics, the all-optical method of attosecond
transient absorption spectroscopy (ATAS) [4-12] is an
important complement to photoelectron-based methods.
In addition to being sensitive to bound-bound transitions,
ATAS allows targets to be studied all the way from a
natural – weak-field – environment up to the strong-field
regime. Using attosecond pulsed extreme-ultraviolet
(XUV) light together with (typically) femtosecond nearinfrared
(NIR) pulses in a pump-probe scheme, dynamical
processes leave their fingerprints in the spectrum of the
transmitted XUV light. Yet unlike streaking, up to now
ATAS lacks the possibility for in-situ characterization of
the femtosecond NIR laser pulse, which drives and
controls the underlying electron dynamics. However,
precise knowledge of its shape and intensity would
enhance the scope of ATAS concerning quantitative
measurements and the control of quantum dynamics in
general.
Here, we demonstrate a new scheme for ATAS combining
the measurement of time-resolved quantum dynamics
with the characterization of the few-cycle driving laser
pulse in one single experiment. Our method is based on
extracting the time-delay-dependent phase shift [11,13-
15] imprinted on a resonance, which is excited by XUV
light and dressed by the femtosecond laser pulse that is to
be characterized. From this phase shift, we are able to
directly obtain the laser pulse duration, as well as its time
dependent intensity. Since we analyze the signature of
the laser pulse interacting with the XUV-excited
spectroscopy target, the pulse characteristics are
determined in situ. The precise knowledge of laser pulse
characteristics in ATAS will enable a more detailed
analysis of bound-state dynamics in strong and short laser 